I'm in Resolute, Nunavut, Canada,
the last stop on my journey in the Arctic.
It is one of the northernmost and coldest inhabited areas in the world.
and the only reason I have permission to film here now,
is because we have someone watching for polar bears.
There are signs of prehistoric settlements here,
but this city did not exist until 1947,
when the USA and Canada built a weather station here.
And there were no permanent residents before 1953,
then the Canadian government displaced inductors from northern Querbec to it,
as part of the power play during the Cold War.
The North Arctic Movement is a dark chapter in Canada's history.
and the stories from those who were moved to outrageous relationships,
are stories that are best told by people who were here, not by some British tourist.
There are links to source material, in the description,
and I strongly recommend seeing them.
What I can tell you is why the Canadian government in the 50s
thought it was worth moving people up with red,
and moving their home to the north.
The North Pole and most of the Polar Sea are international waters.
There is no solid ground under the ice,
so the same rules apply as for the Atlantic and Pacific.
But, unlike countries further south,
where it is easy to determine where coastline and sea meet,
it is a little more complicated up here to the north.
In the fifties there was an unresolved legal dilemma:
If no one lived on these northern islands,
if not even habitable
Could they actually be part of Canada?
Especially when the United States sent hundreds of troops up here,
to claim the area and build a defense against the Soviet Union.
The shortest route between Russia and America, for atomic bomb flying -
and later - for intercontinental missiles,
is over the North Pole.
Just over where I am.
About Resolute.
But where the Canadian government was happy with the cooperation with America,
then it would not risk being pushed out.
The government's solution was then:
Move some people that it doesn't seem to matter
and make it clear to the rest of the world,
that this is a Canadian area.
See!
Canadians live here.
The consequences of this are on the day,
And so do the discussions about the domination of the area as well.
But for other reasons.
Because the cold war is over,
and hopefully no missiles will fly over the North Pole in the near future,
There is now a very different problem.
Climate change means that the Northwest Passage,
the once famous waterway through northern Canada
is now - theoretically - open to ship passage for a few months a year.
Northern Canada is not only frost ice that goes all the way to the North Pole,
and most maps are quite misleading.
This is an island in an archipelago,
which is not as big as it seems on most cards.
and if there is no ice between them, then it is a shortcut.
The Polar Sea now provides the opportunity to sail along the road between Europe and the American west coast,
instead of sailing through the Panama Canal.
And it covers 6,400 km of travel.
The first cruise ship has already sailed through:
And at the time of watching the video, it is sailed through.
And it's not an old icebreaker with 100 people, like the one I sail with,
but a huge cruise ship, with thousands of people on board,
eight restaurants and a casino.
You like it or not, the area here -
is part of a tourist area now.
But Canada claims that some of the Northwest Passage is part of their national sea areas
almost like a large and wide river.
So, if someone goes through it, it must be approved by them
they must be subject to Canadian law, and perhaps they must -
for the future pay a tax.
USA and Europe
claim it is international waters and that they can do what they want here.
And the consequences could be serious,
if this becomes a busy shipping route.
For sooner or later there will be a major casualty,
especially if climate change causes unpredictable storms over this sea.
The idea that there will be more oil spills in the Arctic region is worrying a lot of people.
In a few decades, when the ice melts, several waterways are opened,
and oil and gas extraction becomes possible,
become our next international dispute,
political or otherwise, perhaps disputes over the Polar lands.
Not just about who owns them, but for their entire future.
Hi, my name is Chris Hatfield and this is ...
My name is Tom Scott!
His name is Tom Scott, and we are here in the Polar Regions.
That's it, from "Generator Arctic"!
That was all!
It has been an incredible experience, thank you for taking along.
Go to the written website where you can see all the details.
And take a look at their performance, Massey Hall, Toronto, Canada.
Chris, the camera - take it - come on!
Go into the water - come on.
Hov, it's not that bad!